History

Considered as a sacred monument of Buddhism, Deekshabhoomi is a popular tourist attraction in the Orange City of Nagpur, not only for its superb architecture but also for its historical importance as this is the place where Dr BR Ambedkar along with his followers converted to Buddhism on 14 October 1956.

Inaugurated on December 18, 2001, the present Deekshabhoomi is a massive monument that boasts of a stupa, which is an architectural delight. The Stupa, which to some extent is a replica of another well-known heritage site – the Sanchi Stupa, took almost 23 years to complete and is one of the finest pieces of architecture in Nagpur. Although the stupa resembles Sanchi Stupa in the structure, the major difference between the two is that the Deeksha stupa is hollow from inside. In fact the Deeksha Stupa is the largest hollow stupa amongst all the Buddhist stupas in the world.

On the ground floor there is a 211square feet hall and in the centre of this hall is an idol of Lord Buddha. There is a library and a permanent photo exhibition displaying the events from the lives of both Gautama Buddha and Dr Ambedkar.

There is a hollow dome above the hall, which is surrounded by a veranda. The four fountains surrounding the stupa from all the four directions that adds to the beauty of the Deeksha Stupa. The stupa has four entrances that open in large arcs, which have been decorated with Ashoka Chakras, statues of lions, horses and elephants giving the stupa an ancient look. The lush green garden that surrounds the stupa is another attraction at Deekshabhoomi.

Even today thousands of devotees from all over the world visit the Deeksha stupa on Dussehra and on October 14 to either pay their homage to Dr Ambedkar or to get converted to Buddhism.
Best time to visit

The best time to visit Deekshabhoomi is between October and November as October is the month when thousand of Buddhist devotees visit this Buddhist Stupa in Nagpur.
Trivia

The name Deekshabhoomi has been derived from two words Deeksha, which in Sanskrit means acceptance of religion and Bhoomi, which means Land, so the meaning of Deekshabhoomi is – the land where people willingly accept other religion.
Timing

Deekshabhoomi is open throughout the year to everyone.